# Betterfly: Laptop replacement keyboard overview

This beauty is made with Kailh Choco Burnt Orange switches, though I have some
Choco Browns on the way: The Burnt Orange switches are just a little bit too
heavy: I'd love a middle grown between the two (MX Clears, and Zealios Purples
both fit this bill), but I'd rather have a little too light than a little too
heavy. I ordered them from
[NovelKeys](https://novelkeys.xyz/collections/switches), along with a set of
keycaps. I didn't bother with LED's under the keys (unsure if I'm going to
regret that...) because I've never done that, and manually routing the PCB for a
whole separate LED matrix sounds like a **lot** of work.

The cool thing here, however, is the stuff "around" the board itself. As I
mentioned above, I travel for work sometimes. When I travel, I'm stuck using
either some crappy keyboard laying around at work at some poor soul's desk where
I squat for a day or so, or I have to use the @#$% butterfly thing on the Mac.
After a day or so, my wrists get aggravated. This keyboard has the PCB bolted to
a slab of 1/8" UHMW plastic on the back (attached with 11 M3 recessed bolts, with lock washers and
cap nuts, which I think look moderately decent). The slab-of-plastic has some
clips (also UHMW), which then screw onto the 'side rails' you can see in the
photo (I should probably sand them: they look kind of rough) that slide onto the
MacBook, securing nicely with a hole in the left side for the USB-C connector,
and a hole on the right that will fit a narrow headphone jack. The key switches
mount directly on the PCB, which is exposed (and you can see my goofy PCB trace
design: the light spots are where I routed, so the traces are actually quite
fat!), then the back protects the keyboard (it doesn't seem to hit keys, so I
use Karabiner Elements to disable the builtin keyboard when it detects this guy
attached).

One final physical feature: Those side clips that slide it onto the laptop?
They're the only thing you have to change to adapt it to another device. They
attach with a pair of M1.6 screws that key the thing attached quite securely.
So, when I get a new laptop, I just have to design & mill a couple new small
parts, no new soldering, and \*poof\* Betterfly can carry on it's wrist-saving
ways!

I'll throw links to the AutoDesk Fusion360 project here in the near-future. In
the mean time, I'm procrastinating a bunch of stuff for work that I ought to be
doing. Later...
